
Basic Installation
==================

   These are generic installation instructions.

   The `configure' shell script attempts to guess correct values for
various system-dependent variables used during compilation.  It uses
those values to create a `Makefile' in each directory of the package.
It may also create one or more `.h' files containing system-dependent
definitions.  Finally, it creates a shell script `config.status' that
you can run in the future to recreate the current configuration, a file
`config.cache' that saves the results of its tests to speed up
reconfiguring, and a file `config.log' containing compiler output
(useful mainly for debugging `configure').

** For most users **

[If you are using EUPS, installation instructions follow at
"Installation for EUPS users".]

The simplest way to install the slim binaries and the slim library is:

./configure
make
sudo make install


One can use the usual argument "--prefix=/usr/unusual/place" as an
argument to configure.  This sets the root of the target installation
directories.  That is, binaries go into /usr/unusual/place/bin and
similarly for libraries into lib, manpages into man, and header files
into include.




Installation for EUPS users
===========================

If you are using EUPS, you build the normal way but install
differently.  EUPS is the extended Unix product system, a version
management system that allows multiple named versions to be available
simultaneously to multiple users.  There is a special EUPS-aware
makefile named ups/Makefile.  You want to use that for installation.

Build the system as usual:

./configure
make

But then use the eups-aware ups/Makefile to install and declare the
version you just built.

cd ups
make install version=v2_6_0   # (or your desired tag name)
make declare 

In place of "make declare", you can "make current" (which implies
"declare") instead.  The declare target registers and installed system
with EUPS; the "current" target also moves the "current version"
pointer to point at the version that you just installed.

It is perfectly fine to come back later and "make current" once the
latest version has been verified/tested in some way.